Data Scaling Techniques for Machine Learning
This repository provides a comprehensive implementation and comparison of various data scaling and normalization techniques. Scaling is a critical preprocessing step in machine learning that ensures features contribute equally to the model’s performance and speeds up the convergence of gradient-based algorithms.

📋 Table of Contents
Overview
Implemented Methods
Manual Max Scaling
Min-Max Scaler
Standard Scaler
Normalizer
Installation & Usage
Overview
In most machine learning workflows, features have different units and scales. This discrepancy can lead to biased models or slow optimization. This project demonstrates four primary ways to bring features into a comparable range using Python and Scikit-learn.

Implemented Methods
1. Manual Max Scaling
The simplest form of scaling involves dividing every data point by the maximum value found in the dataset. This transforms the data into a relative scale where the largest value becomes 1.0.

Best for: Quick transformations where the relative magnitude to the maximum value is the only concern.

 
2. Min-Max Scaler
The Min-Max Scaler transforms features by scaling them to a fixed range, typically between 
0 and 1.

. It preserves the original distribution of the data while ensuring that no single feature dominates others due to its scale.

How it works: It subtracts the minimum value of the feature and divides it by the range (maximum - minimum).
Key Advantage: It is highly effective for algorithms that do not assume a specific distribution (like K-Nearest Neighbors or Neural Networks).

 
3. Standard Scaler (Standardization)
Standardization rescales the data so that it has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Unlike Min-Max scaling, it does not bound values to a specific range, which can be an advantage if your data contains outliers.

How it works: It centers the data by subtracting the mean and then scales it by dividing by the standard deviation.
Key Advantage: Essential for algorithms that assume a Gaussian (Normal) distribution, such as Support Vector Machines (SVM), Linear Regression, and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).

 
4. Normalizer
While the previous methods scale features (columns), the Normalizer scales individual samples (rows). It rescales each observation so that the resulting vector has a unit norm (a length of 1).

How it works: Each sample is scaled independently of other samples so that the norm (L1, L2, or Max) of the row equals 1.
Key Advantage: This is particularly useful in text classification or clustering (like Latent Semantic Analysis) where the direction of the data vector matters more than its absolute magnitude.
Installation & Usage
Prerequisites
Ensure you have Python installed along with the following libraries:

pip install numpy pandas scikit-learn

Author: [Ramin0036]
